AbstractContemporary literary scholars argue that within the Senecan corpus there exist two disputed plays, Octavia, and Hercules Oetaeus. The plethora of “traditional” close reading approaches mostly agrees that Octavia is not written by Seneca since it contains precise historical information that was impossible for Senecan the Younger to had known, whereas most of them are not really sure about the second one, Hercules Oetaeus. On the other hand, a few literary scholars state with rather weak arguments that Octavia was written by Seneca the Younger. With the boom of computational approaches to literature, some scholars tried to evaluate techniques and their software by applying to these —amongst others— disputed texts.By applying the General Imposters method, this thesis investigates the nature of the authorship problem of Seneca’s disputed plays. More specifically it is shown that we have to deal with an open-set verification problem, where the candidate author(s) of the disputed texts is not known. Next, using a Bootstrap Consensus Tree we see that Octavia and Phoenissae behave as outliers within the Senecan corpus, even though they are clustered within it. This formation suggests that an imitator wrote Octavia, since this text forms a group within the rest of the Senecan plays, but it behaves as an outlier within them, which raises concerns about the authorial fingerprint. After that, following close reading approaches that compare the disputed texts only with the rest of the Senecan plays in order to probe the disputed authorship of the texts, a Principal Component Analysis using a covariance and correlation matrix, that shows that there exist three outliers in the Senecan corpus of plays—Octavia, Hercules Oetaeus and Phoenissae.My research findings indicate that Octavia was written by an imitator and not by Seneca the Younger; Hercules Oetaeus starts to behave as an outlier only when the focus is on a very few function words, whereas Phoenissae is an outlier within the Senecan corpus because of the smaller size of the text and the fact that is it an unfinished and thus un-edited play. Furthermore, in terms of computational stylometry methods the research reflects theories and approaches that were previously discussed by other scholars and the still unresolved issue of cherry-picking the parameters in authorship attribution or verification problems.1. IntroductionThe title in the cover page might be misleading by mentioning that these two texts were written by Seneca minor, when Octavia and Hercules Oetaeus (henceforth: O and HO respectively) are two tragedies that, according to a lot of literary scholars, cannot be attributed to Seneca. By extension, according to Ferri (2014, p. 1), O is the only fabula praetexta that survived until today from the corpus of Latin dramas;1 In other words, it is the only surviving Latin tragedy that has a historical subject. The reference to the name of Seneca without adding any cognomen or praenomen might cause confusion since even the name per se is quite problematic. Ten tragedies are attributed to a person named Marcus Lucius Annaeus Seneca, but no author with this name is known (Nolden, 2019, p. 1). One name that is connected to the aforementioned one is Lucius Annaeus Seneca.2 According to Kohn (2003, p. 271) from ancient historians, there is no mention of the plays when they refer to Lucius Annaeus Seneca. Moreover, prior to the eleventh century, manuscripts do not include O and HO, in contrast with manuscripts that dated after the thirteenth century (Reynolds, 1984). An explanation is provided by Lefèvre (1985) who argues that these plays fit well within the corpus of Stoic philosophy and, as Kohn (2003) points out, there is no alternative author that can work as a candidate for these two plays. This last point works as a barrier to the problem of authorship attribution for O and HO, thus, as it will be probed, the concept of authorship verification3 will be followed.Moreover, contemporary literary scholars agree that O and HO are two plays that were not written by Seneca minor; they base their arguments on close reading of the texts. In contrast with close reading literary scholars, a few computer scientists tried to approach these texts through distant reading methods of stylometry in order not to answer the question of “who was the author of these tragedies?”, but to evaluate their models or techniques that were built to solve authorship attribution or verification problems of disputed texts.Is Seneca the Younger the author of the two disputed texts, O and HO? With respect to the aforementioned disputed plays, can we categorize this classification problem as an authorship attribution problem? If not, is it an authorship verification problem? Can methods that work better with close-set attribution cases, help us retrieve relevant information about the case of Seneca’s disputed texts? Questions like these are the main concern of this thesis.1.1. The confusing case of the Senecan nameAs mentioned in the Introduction section above, ten extant tragedies are attributed to a person with the name Marcus Lucius Annaeus Seneca (Kohn, 2003; Nolden, 2019).4 At this point, confusion might be created for the readers, since two people from Ancient Rome are known by this name; Lucius Annaeus Seneca and his son (henceforth they will be called Seneca the Elder and Seneca the Younger, respectively). Even from the Renaissance, people tended to confuse his names and works with the ones created by his son, Seneca the Younger (Sussman, 1978).Seneca the Elder was born in Cordoba (now Córdoba) in Spain around 50 BCE and there is hardly any evidence of his public activity. Although, to distinguish his name from the one of his son, a lot of scholars either use the titles Elder or Rhetorician (for the father Seneca) and Younger or Philosopher (for the son Seneca) (Conte et al., 1999; Kohn, 2003).Only one work of Seneca the Elder has come down until today with the title Oratorum et rhetoric sententiae divisiones colores. According to Fairweather (2007, p. 328), there is hardly any evidence that this text belongs to Seneca the Elder. Even though this argument sounds a little bit arbitrary, the only reason that this text belongs to Seneca the Elder is that no one else later than Seneca’s Elder era could have spent time bothering to draw attention to include extracts by oratores (i.e., amateurs declaimers) and rhetores (i.e., a teacher of rhetoric or a person skilled in the art of rhetoric) (Fairweather, 2007).5 According to Conte et al. (1999, p. 404), the aforementioned work contains epigrammatic phrases with the intention of impressing a listener or a reader.Seneca the Younger was born in 4 BCE. in Córdoba of Spain and died in 65 CE in Rome of Italy (D.D. Reynolds, 2022). He came to Rome in order to be educated in the school of rhetoric, politics, and philosophy. Even though he succeeded in his forensic activity and political career, emperor Claudius accused him of the adultery of Julia Livilla, who was Germanicus’ younger daughter and Caligula’s sister (Conte et al., 1999). These accusations led to the relegation and by extension to his exile in Corsica where he stayed until 49 CE. Upon his return and with the support of Agrippina —future emperor Nero’s mother— he became a tutor of Nero alongside Sextus Afranius Burrus (Dudley, 1998; Conte et al., 1999; D. D. Reynolds, 2022).The aforementioned, highly educative milieu led to Nero’s first stable period of government, which was, although, followed by a steep deterioration and consequently led to the murder of his own mother, Agrippina (Conte et al., 1999). After this incident, Seneca the Younger was implicated in the Pisonian conspiracy of 65 CE that led to his condemnation to death by Nero and to his famous suicide in the same year (Tacitus, Annales 15.62-64).In order to avoid any confusion with respect to these two aforementioned people, Seneca the Elder and Seneca the Younger, it is necessary to mention at this point that, henceforth, whenever there is a mention of the name of Seneca per se, it will always be connected with Seneca the Younger.
2. Literature ReviewThe problem of authorship attribution through close and distant reading methodsThis chapter will be split into two main sections. In the first section close reading methods will be discussed concerning the problem of authorship attribution of O and consequently of HO.6 After the presentation of the aforementioned arguments, there will be a subsection that will discuss the exact opposite opinion; that O and HO can be attributed to Seneca. Moreover, in the second section, there will be a discussion about computational methods and the argument that they generate concerning the authorship attribution of the Senecan tragedies. The aim of this chapter is, firstly, to present some of the close and distant reading methods that tried to answer the question to the problem of authorship attribution of two disputed “Senecan” tragedies, O and HO. In addition, it will try to show that there is still a research gap in the computational methods applied to these two disputed texts.2.1. Close reading approachesThe Senecan corpus of tragedies consists of ten extant plays: Agamemnon, Hercules Furens, Hercules Oetaeus, Medea, Octavia, Oedipus, Phaedra, Phoenissae, Thyestes, and Troades.7 From the overall amount of ten tragedies, two of them, Octavia, and Hercules Oetaeus, cannot be certainly attributed to Seneca the Younger. In this chapter following some close reading approaches by literary scholars, we will try to briefly present the authorship attribution problem concerning these two plays and explain why these tragedies are included in the Seneca corpus of plays. According to Ferri (2014, p. 31):	“The likeliest scenario is that the play (i.e., Octavia) is attributed to Seneca by some late-antique editor with an antiquarian penchant”.This version seems the safest approach to the problem. In fact, tragedies that are attributed to Seneca are transmitted only in two recensions; the A-version, which is considered to be interpolated, and the codex Etruscus (E), which is considered more complete in terms of edition (Sluiter, 1949). O is transmitted only in the A-recension/branch and there is no distinction between O and the rest of the Senecan tragedies with a mythological content (Herington, 1961). A possible explanation of the inclusion of O by the editor(s) is the fact that the aforementioned tragedy bears a resemblance with the rest of the Senecan plays.A problem with the authorship attribution of O lies in the consistency of the literary power. In other words, the author of O, if not Seneca, had a hard time remaining steady in terms of literary power during the writing of the work; the scenes gradually become smaller in length, and the words are repeated again and again and the use of certain poetic phrases seems to be very artificial (as if they have been memorised by heart by the author) (Herington, 1961).In fact, Carbone (1977) and Poe (1989) agree on the fact that it is hard to find a passage that shows that O was written after Seneca’s death, but there is a cumulative weight of evidence that O was not written by Seneca. The approach that is followed by Carbone is a close reading method of approaching the text line by line; his insights are interesting since he focuses on a careful analysis of historical allusions behind the dramatic structures and he concludes that it is impossible for the author of O to be Seneca because otherwise, he would know events that happened after his death (Carbone, 1977).Focusing mainly on the verbal style and the plot, Poe (1989) suggests that O does not belong to Seneca, but it is the product of an imitator. By analysing the patterns that re-occur in the Senecan tragedies (i.e., the tragedies that are attributed to Seneca) he found out that the imitator must be someone who has a limited literary experience and low levels of creativity when it comes to the provision of solutions in parts of the plot that seem to have reached a deadlock.Focusing on the other aspects of the text, such as the language and the style of the text, Ferri (2014) argues that Senecan tragedies have been sculptured with a highly rhetorical style that is strongly affected by Ovid (Gahan, 1985). The author of Octavia seems to not care that much about the style and the elegance of the text that places him on the margins of the literary field (Richter, 1862; Ferri, 2014).Seneca’s appearance in the play made Ferri (2014) believe that this tragedy was written not as an intentional fake, but rather as an exculpation of Seneca from the merciless governance of Nero. Even though this argument may sound true, it only refers to the purpose of writing the tragedy and does not reveal something about the author; Seneca himself could have written this tragedy to cleanse himself of Nero’s governance. To elaborate more on this argument, as an example we can refer to the artificiality of the Latin language used by the author of Octavia and the rest of the tragedies in the Senecan corpus; atque is postponed five times after one word, whereas in the entire Seneca corpus it happens only once; -que is attached to the second word from the sentence beginning three times, whereas in the Senecan corpus we are not able in finding a parallel (Ferri, 2014).On the other hand, HO also raises some concerns about its authorship attribution8. The majority of literary scholars and critics agree now that the play in its present form was not written by Seneca or initially it was written by him and then the editor of the manuscript9 inserted his own writing approach creating a bizarre tragedy (Boyle, 2003). Indeed, a close reading of the play comparatively with the rest of the tragedies can reveal some small but crucial differences in terms of writing style, which lead some scholars to believe that there is a different approach to playwriting (Marshall, 2014, p. 40). Some of the features of the text that lead scholars to believe that HO is erroneously attributed to Seneca is that the length of the tragedy is twice as long as Seneca’s other plays (Boyle, 2003) and, according to Star (2015), it is the longest extant drama to survive from antiquity with 1996 lines of verse. Another feature was the insertion of several passages in the play that are borrowed from the eight genuine plays.10 These passages are considered to be out of context, to some extent reworked and inserted into HO. Some examples of these insertions are provided by Axelson (1967, p. 92-95 (as cited by Tarrant (2017)) and they are the lines 867-869 (which is a rework from the tragedy Oedipus) and the lines 991-994 (which is considered to be a reworking of Agamemnon 972-975). For scholars that follow this argument, they have to restrict the involvement of Seneca the Younger to the first third of the play, from line 1 until line 705 (Edert, 1909; Tarrant, 2017). Moreover, Walde (1991, p. 1) and Axelson (1967, p. 92) (as both cited by Nolden (2019, p. 1) argue that the rest of HO was written by a clumsy imitator later and in a hasty way.A peculiarity of both the disputed plays, HO and O, is the unusual closing of them. They both end with a choral statement—usually it is a short ode or a lyric utterance from the chorus—, which is not unusual for the attic tragedy (Boyle, 2003, pp. 83-84). Although, in contrast with the Attic tragedies, every genuine Senecan tragedy does not end with a choral ending.11 Since it is a pattern that occurs only in the disputed plays, that led Boyle (2003) and Tarrant (2017) to believe that O and HO are of non-Senecan authorship. As it can be observed by the arguments that were presented in the previous paragraphs, it can be concluded that the majority of literary scholars and critics believe that O and HO are two tragedies that were not written—one of them not to its full extent— by Seneca the Younger. Although, there are some scholars who believe that these two texts carry the authorial fingerprint of Seneca the Younger. As a counter-argument to those who believe that Seneca is not the author of O because of the precise description of Nero’s death in this tragedy, Sluiter (1949) states that the forecasting passages are quite obscure and based on the fall of Nero’s publicity during the last years of his reign, it would not that hard for the highly intelligent Seneca to foresee Nero’s imminent demise. Moreover, as a conclusion of his work, Carlsson (1926, p. 51 (as cited by Nolden (2019, p. 2)) rather boldly states that O, if it was not written by Seneca the Younger, could easily have been a masterpiece of imitation. In conclusion, the authorship attribution of O and HO to Seneca the Younger is quite problematic because the contemporary reader and scholar are incapable of defining whether missing style elements are due to inadequacy on behalf of the imitator of Seneca or they were created intentionally by Seneca himself to deal with contemporary critiques of his own style (Ferri, 2015, p. 521).2.2. Distant reading approachesThere are a lot of distant reading approaches concerning authorship attribution problems. Although, since the scope of this thesis is to -rather boldly- prove whether the disputed tragedies were written by Seneca or not, a brief presentation of these projects would be out of the scope of this research. For this reason, the focus will be applied only to distant reading approaches concerning the solution of authorship attribution problems of the Senecan tragedies. This chapter will also try to prove that, even though there is a discussion about Senecan texts through distant reading approaches, there still exists a gap in the current literature, since these papers are merely focusing on the evaluation of the methods implemented either for software or for more general research purposes.With the implementation of some computational methods to the Senecan texts, Brofos et al. (2014) tried to examine the authorship of the two disputed texts. Using a “one-class SVM (Support Vector Machine)12 with functional n-gram probability features” they concluded that Hercules Oetaeus and Octavia do not belong to Seneca without, nevertheless, giving any further explanation (Brofos et al., 2014, pp. 8-9). The lack of explanation on their behalf can be explained by the scope of their paper. The aim of their paper is to evaluate their software which is specialized in automated authorship attribution (Brofos et al., 2014). Concerning authorship attribution problems, the study of more than one case study usually does not provide additional space to further elaborate on their results.However, their results can be very useful for future research, since they found out that, even though scholars came to a consensus with respect to O—it was not written by Seneca—, there is still uncertainty about HO. Following this line of thought, Brofos et al. (2014) observed that O is closer to the hyper-plane than HO (Brofos et al., 2014, p. 8). This can be explained in two ways; if we accept the hypothesis that O and HO were not written by Seneca, then the latter play does not belong to Seneca and it was written by someone who was less skilled and knowledgeable in the Senecan style and verse than the imposter of O. In his Bachelor’s thesis, Nolden (2019) focuses on the disputed Senecan tragedies. Although, the primary focus of Nolden’s thesis is not on the Senecan tragedies themselves but rather on the evaluation of text mining techniques in order to answer authorship attribution problems. Following Deneire’s (2018) line of thought, this thesis, according to Nolden (2019, p. 2):      “...focuses on the question whether a computer can help finding stylistic features in a text and attribute an author to it”.Continuing below:	“...to what extent are computational stylistics methods able to find Seneca in the tragedies attributed to him? (Nolden, 2019, p. 2)As mentioned before, Nolden (2019) focuses on the credibility of a variety of computational stylistics techniques that are examined closely through the authorship attribution problem of the two disputed Senecan tragedies, HO and O. Even though the scope of Nolden’s (2019) thesis is completely different of this thesis, we should mention the importance of his approach. In other words, looking closely at his results, we can observe which methods would be a good idea to be avoided since they will not yield any interesting results.In conclusion, there is an extensive bibliography of close reading approaches concerning Seneca the Younger in general and the tragedies that are attributed to him. On the one hand, most of the contemporary literary scholars have reached a consensus now that O and HO are highly possible not written by Seneca the Younger. On the other hand, there is also a small number of scholars that support the exact opposite opinion; the two disputed tragedies carry the Senecan authorial fingerprint, and thus they are correctly attributed to him. The debate is still ongoing, especially for HO. Moreover, it should be noted that, at least as far as I am concerned, there are no papers that apply computational methods to answer the question of authorship attribution with respect to the Senecan tragedies. Trying to fill this research gap, this thesis will try to apply some computational methods in order to contribute to and strengthen the arguments surrounding the authorship of the disputed tragedies. The main question will be as follows: were O and HO written by Seneca the Younger or are they, at least to their present form, a product of an imitator?
3. Description of the datasetIn this chapter, a description of the dataset, that is going to be used in the analysis section, will be attempted. The aim of this chapter is not merely a presentation of the texts that are contained in the dataset. What it attempts to achieve, as its main goal, is to explain why these specific texts were chosen and, by extension, to show why this thesis will be differentiated from the rest of the research.13 The method that was used for the selection of the texts is the combination of close reading methods and theories in order to find texts written by authors other than Seneca the Younger; texts, though, that are connected temporally and sometimes spatially with Seneca the Younger . It should be mentioned in advance that the arbitrariness of choosing the texts could not have been completely eliminated, thus the main aim and goal of this dataset is to reduce this arbitrariness as much as possible to texts that are (inter)connected with each other, either because of the genre or the era or even both.The compilation of this dataset follows a very specific approach. A text (disputed or not) is highly connected with the era in which it was written, thus the main aim was to create an author-based corpus that will eventually provide a narrow variety of language, which will reduce the false negatives that might be generated during the phase of analysis (Grieve, 2007, p. 255). An idiolect is defined as “the totality of the possible utterances of one speaker at one time in using a language to interact with one other speaker (Bloch, 1948, p. 7 (as cited in Grieve (2007, p. 256). Following this definition, we can assume, as Grieve (2007) does, that each author corpus defines and represents an idiolect of a specific person in a specific time. Lastly, it should be noted, that in this thesis we are dealing with an open-set attribution case, which means that the list of possible candidate authors cannot be reliably and safely defined, since in the current bibliography for Seneca not a single name of a possible candidate survives (Eder, 2017, p. 50).The dataset consists of 33 files, and it is contained in an overarching file, which makes up the corpus of this study. Ten files of them belong to Seneca and correspond to the tragedies that are attributed to him by the manuscript tradition (see above Literature Review). All Seneca texts were collected from Perseus Digital Library14. The list of the Senecan texts is as follows:1) Medea2) Octavia (disputed)3) Phaedra4) Oedipus5) Hercules Furens6) Hercules Oetaeus (disputed)7) Agamemnon8) Troades9) Phoenissae10) ThyestesAs a first distractor15, the extant six Satires written by Aulus Persius Flaccus (Persius henceforth) will be used. Every Satire was collected from The Latin Library.16 The reason behind this choice is that Persius along with Caesius Bassus, Marcus Annaeus Lucanus, Lucius Annaeus Cornutus and Lucius Annaeus Seneca form the Neronian literature (Dinter, 2013). It might be interesting to put some poets that lived and even wrote in the same era because this factor might yield some interesting results. Six are the Satires written by Persius and all of them are included in the dataset.As a second distractor, Bellum Civile (also known as Pharsalia) by Marcus Annaeus Lucanus (Lucan henceforth) will be chosen. The texts written by Lucan were also collected from The Latin Library.17 The reason for this is that Lucan was the grandson of Seneca the Elder and nephew of Seneca the Younger. He was involved in politics and can be considered a key figure within the emperor Nero's inner circle; the latter's jealousy led to Lucan’s forced suicide (von Albrecht, 2019, p. 913). Following the results that were generated by Brofos et al. (2014), applying computational stylometric techniques to Seneca and Lucan might yield some interesting results in terms of the influence of the former on the latter. Furthermore, he is also part of the Neronian literature and thus wholly aligned with the previous argument of the era18. Bellum Civile (henceforth BC) consists of 10 books and all of them will be included in the dataset.As the third and final distractor, two works by Publius Papinius Statius (henceforth Statius) will be used, which were collected by The Latin Library;19 Silvae and Achilleid. The former contains the occasional poems that were written by him and can be considered an anthology of Statius’ poems (Conte et al., 1999, p. 482). The latter is an unfinished epic poem about Achilles’ life before the Trojan war; only two books were written before the death of Statius (Conte et al., 1999, p. 487). The choice of Statius as an impostor follows Ferri’s hypothesis that the poet of O, if not Seneca, knew Statius’ poem since several reminiscences from the latter in different passages of Octavia connect chronologically the two texts (Ferri, 2014). The similarities between O and Silvae mostly lie in the ornamental and descriptive sections of the play creating a thematic and linguistic correspondence with the respect to Jupiter’s traditional metamorphoses and the theme of the wedding ceremony which is commonplace for both of these works (Ferri, 2014, pp. 21-25). From a different perspective, Ferri’s (2014) hypothesis suggests two things: either that O was written during Statius’ time and that we can use Silvae as terminus ante quem of the writing of O. Both of these viewing angles are really important and interesting in the problem of the Senecan tragedies.To chronologically define the dataset—and mostly the disputed texts— in the terms of the ancient Roman literature, Quintillian’s criticism can be used as terminus ante quem. Moreover, a terminus post quem is the death of Nero that is described in a detailed and accurate way in Octavia20. In other words, the works that have been included in the dataset span from 68 CE until 96 CE. Since the time span of this corpus is 26 years, we believe that we managed to successfully limit the time span which will consequently lead to a limitation of the temporal variation (Grieves, 2007, p. 256).
4. Analysis and ResultsThe structure of this chapter is as follows:First, a reference to the works that this thesis takes inspiration from. Then, a brief introduction to the method used is presented. Second, the results and, when it is possible, the graphs are presented followed by some brief description. Third, an interpretation of the results is conducted which is connected to the previous research in the field of authorship attribution studies (both following “traditional” and “non-traditional/ computational” methods); the aim of this part is to connect the present study with previous research on this topic and, by extension, to explain why specific parameters for its model were chosen. Third, a discussion will follow to enhance the study with a critical approach to the methods used in the present thesis and to present the possibilities that each method incorporated and at the same time the limitations that are present in each one of them.4.1. BackgroundThis thesis takes inspiration from a plethora of past works conducted in the broad discipline of computational stylistics and, more specifically, in authorship attribution studies. The largest part of this work will be presented in the main analysis section. Before proceeding to the presentation of the methods and the parameters chosen to yield the more precise results, it is necessary to define a term that will be used in the rest of this thesis. The basic notion behind quantitative authorship attribution studies is that the author of a work can be selected from a set of candidate authors; in our case, only Seneca the Younger is a possible candidate author, all the others are just distractor authors. Moreover, as it will be shown below, main aim of this thesis is to show if the disputed texts behave as outliers within the corpus. This can be done by extracting a variety of features individually from the corpus; these features will be measured according to a statistical metric and will be compared with the works of other authors inside the corpus (Grieve, 2007, p. 251). Consequently, it is very usual in authorship attribution studies, to represent these numbers in an overarching graph in order to make the results more interpretable.23 Although, as it will be shown, the case of Seneca demands a different approach to the authorship attribution problem of the two disputed texts, which —according to many scholars24— have been erroneously attributed to Seneca the Younger. As mentioned before, in the Description of the Dataset section, the case of Seneca’s plays is an open-set attribution problem. Therefore, an authorship verification approach should be followed in order to observe whether the two disputed texts are connected to Seneca or not. The reason is that a lot of times it is really hard to guarantee that the author of a disputed text is contained in the dataset. Moreover, for Seneca’s disputed plays is impossible to indicate a possible candidate, hence the main aim of this study is to verify whether or not a disputed text was written by (a) given candidate author(s)25 (Kestemont et al., 2016, p. 87-8). As it mentioned before in this chapter (see para. 1) this author could be Seneca the Younger, or someone else who is included or not in the corpus.Before proceeding to the presentation of the results, one last point should be mentioned. What is the line of thought behind the parameters that were used in the experiments? To quote Grieve (2007, p. 267) there are five conditions that should be fulfilled in order to resolve cases of disputed authorship. The first condition is the identification of a valid set of distractors; in our case, it has been already described in a previous section why these specific candidate authors were chosen. The second is for the researcher to collect large enough samples of each candidate author’s writings. These samples should bear the best possible stylistic resemblance to the anonymous text. Every text that is used in this dataset does not belong to the same genre, but it was written in verse, which is something that previous computational approaches to the problem did not take into account (Brofos et al., 2014; Nolden, 2019). In addition, all of the texts used in this study are connected to each other chronologically which, as mentioned before, creates an idiolect for the language used in the texts. The next two conditions are connected to the testing and evaluation of the algorithm and method used in order to choose which is the most appropriate for a specific authorship attribution task. These two steps can be considered a corollary since no consensus has been achieved on the number and the type of the features used for stylometric tests (Stamatatos, 2009, pp. 540-541; Kestemont et al., 2013, p. 206; Eder, 2017, p. 52). So far, the basic notion is that the size of the dataset and the inflexion of the language are two —among the many—factors that can generate completely different results in authorship attribution tasks. The last condition is the implementation of the proper algorithm with the “correct” parameters. All these three conditions are going to be explained in the next chapters in order for the reader to be able to understand the line of thought behind this research and to verify that these results (to some extent) did not occur by chance.Most of the methods that were used to tackle this complex authorship attribution problem from different perspectives are all included in the package stylo (Eder et al., 2016).26The package that it is going to be used is Stylo. Stylo is an R package for high-level stylometric analyses of text sets in which there is an issue of authorship attribution or verification created by Maciej Eder, Mike Kestemont, Jan Rybicki, and Steffen Pielström. To perform the aforementioned high-level stylometric analyses it offers a great variety of supervised and unsupervised multivariate methods, supplemented by GUI (Graphic User Interface)—for non-technical and novice practitioners to be able to interact with all the methods provided by stylo without requiring any previous programming experience— and some visualisations to make the results more interpretable for the researcher and their reading audience (Eder et al., 2016).
4.2. Feature SelectionProceeding to the results that the implementation of this method produced in this corpus, a computational stylometrist would agree that there are a lot of techniques and possible parameters that someone could follow to generate the desired results. Although, the hardest part of this research was to balance all these pros and cons of a variety of methods and approaches proposed by stylometrists in the past and to avoid the infamous “cherry-picking” since so far there is no consensus on best practice.The General Imposters method (see below the section 4.3) was applied to all 33 texts that are contained in the dataset. The pre-processing steps were the following: the deletion of the pronouns since studies have shown that some of the function words and —especially personal— pronouns can be highly related to the genre or topic, the narrative perspective and an author’s gender (Newman et al., 2008, pp. 215-216; Hoover, 2014, p. 480; Kestemont et al., 2013).
The texts were tokenized by taking into account the fact that some editions of the text do not distinguish the letters v/u, so whenever this was applicable, a consistent conversion of “v” to u” was applied. Consequently, the pre-processed text was fed to the model in order to create the proper features. Since Latin is a highly inflected language it was decided for this method to look only at character tetra-grams.27 At first sight character n-grams might seem completely uninformative and meaningless, but they were chosen because a lot of studies have shown that this type of feature is an excellent feature in authorship attribution studies (Koppel et al., 2009, pp. 12-13; Stamatatos, 2009, p. 541- 542; Eder, 2011). In the assessment of document similarity, character n-grams has been found that they work very well (Damashek, 1995 (as cited by Koppel et al., 2009, p. 12)).  Especially, in Latin, character tetra-grams and penta-grams produced the most accurate results in comparison with word n-grams and character bi-grams, tri-grams and tetra-grams (Eder, 2011, p. 109-112). According to Kestemont et al. (2013, p. 206), this seems to happen because character n-grams can capture information below the word level (e.g., case endings and other grammatical morphemes); “a little bit of everything” (Kestemont, 2014, p. 62). Additionally, as it is illustrated in the example below, the inflected and agglutinative nature of languages, such as Latin and Polish, can describe something without the use of a phrasal verb or circumlocution, whereas in the aforementioned languages this can be done with the use of a case. According to Eder (2011, pp. 108-109), this might be the reason that character n-grams work better in inflected and agglutinative languages.28 Since Latin is a highly inflected language which constantly uses these endings to indicate a case or the grammatical function of a word and a lot of prepositions, determiners and particles are connected to words thence studying the character n-grams can only add some additional information to the study which will not be irrelevant to the stylistic approach (Kestemont, 2014, p. 60). To better understand how highly inflected languages work we can think of an example. An ancient Roman would say “murus saxis factus”, which with the ablative suffix -is means “a wall made with stones”.29 To further elaborate on this, it can be observed that this suffix in this specific context indicates an ablative of means; in other words, it indicates the mean (either material or immaterial) with which something has been done. In order to say that in English, as it can already been seen from the translation of the example, a speaker should use the function word with, which is necessary to indicate the mean (in some contexts). Therefore, it can be said that sometimes the functionality in highly inflected languages, such as Latin or Polish lies in suffixes which will not be taken into account unless a character n-gram is applied. Moreover, using character n-grams does not require any lemmatization or normalization of the words, because the model looks below the standard word level (Kestemont et al., 2013, p. 206). Lastly, we can think of function words in order to understand better the importance of character n-grams. Function words are important in stylometric analyses because of their highly frequent appearance of them in a text. This leads us to the idea that the more observations there are about an item the more accurate and trustworthy the results of a research will be. Character n-grams, when applied to a text, can generate far more observations-data points than simple words can do. Following this line of thought, it can be argued that from a quantitative perspective this big number of observations might be responsible for the superiority of character n-grams against function words (Kestemont, 2014, p. 63).The distance metric that was used was Eder’s Delta. A study has shown that this kind of distance performs better than Burrow’s Delta and Cosine Delta in highly inflected languages, such as Latin ​​(Eder, 2015). One potential explanation for this could be because Burrow’s Delta was firstly created by Burrow for English texts.30 In addition to that, Kestemont (2014, p. 63) reports that Delta method is biased against words, which might create some problems with character n-grams because, as it was proved before, highly inflected and agglutinative languages contain some of their functionality in prefixes and suffixes attached to words; this is one more reason why Eder’s Delta was chosen for this study. Following Eder’s analogy (as cited by Schöch (2012)) of distances to political systems, Eder’s Delta works like a feudal monarchy. In other words, as Schöch (2012) explains, a specific weighing is applied to the importance of each frequency. Consequently, the weight of less frequent words increases without ever becoming equal to that of most frequent words (henceforth: MFWs).Lastly, as it might be already obvious from the description above the style markers used are a commonly used and reliable solution, the Most Frequent Words (MFWs) (Mosteller & Wallace, 1964; Burrows, 2002; Eder, 2011, pp. 105- 106).4.3. General Imposters methodKoppel and Winter (2014) introduced the second verification system (o2), namely the General Imposters method (henceforth: GI method or framework) with which they tried, with an almost unsupervised approach, to measure the performance of this method in the authentication of short documents (Koppel & Winter, 2014, p. 186). The first application of this method was done by Kestemont et al. (2016) when they tried to authenticate some of Julius Caesar’s disputed writings.GI method combines two different approaches. At first, it tries to answer the question of whether two documents are more similar to one another than other documents in a given corpus. To do that it uses “a variety of stochastically impaired feature spaces” (Eder, 2012, p. 159).31 Consequently, these feature spaces are compared to 	samples of distractor authors (Juola, 2015), also known as “imposters” (Kestemont et al., 2016, p. 88). GI method, as was briefly described above, is offered by the package stylo (ver. 0.6.7) (Eder, 2018). In other words, the texts pre-processed and represented in a form of a features’ frequency matrix are contrasted in several iterations (default = 100 iterations) a disputed text against texts written by authors that are suspected of being the actual author or a selection of authors that are not the authors. The output is a score between 0 and 1 (Eder, 2018). The higher the score for an author the more likely that he is the author of the text.Focusing on the imposters per se, they can be candidate authors of the disputed text(s), but they can also be random authors to evaluate the performance of the model when it comes to the classification of a text. In order to make the texts more comparable with each other, I provided a set of three distractor authors (excluding Seneca) that lived at almost the same age as Seneca the Younger, they grew up in the same environment as him and they are highly influenced by the latter.324.3.1.  ResultsFor O the results for character tetra-grams, using Eder’s Delta as a distance metric, and looking at the 100 until 1500 Most Frequent Characters (henceforth: MFCs) 5-grams with 1000 iterations were:lucanpersiussenecastatius0.0410.0000.9920.041Whereas for HO with the same parameters:lucanpersiussenecastatius0.010.0001.0000.004Before proceeding to the interpretation of the results, it is necessary to clarify why some of the parameters were chosen to be incorporated in the model. First of all, to mitigate the problem of cherry-picking the number of MFCs and, to some extent, obtain more reliable results, it was decided to run this classification test several times with different vectors of MFCs (Rybicki & Eder, 2011; Eder & Rybicki, 2013, p. 232); that is why the number of MFCs spans from 100 to 1500. Furthermore, this number of MFCs was chosen following Rybicki and Eder (2011, p. 318)33 and looking at the limitations in the size of one of the distractor authors (i.e., Persius) whose texts are really small compared to the rest of the authors. In addition, the number of iterations was set to 1000 in order to increase the accuracy of the classification. Lastly, in each iteration, 50% of the features and 50% of the text of each imposter will be chosen randomly in order to be analysed. When performing a large number of iterations, in which a random proportion of features and text is selected, helps the model to cover a huge number of features, find some outliers that might be hidden, and thus leads to more reliable results (Eder et al., 2016).Having these parameters in mind and looking at the results someone could observe that the Senecan authorial fingerprint is really high in both O and HO; the results are 0.992 and 1.000 respectively, so it would not be an exaggeration to say that these texts were written undeniably by Seneca’s stylus. Although, by supporting the previous argument, we forget some really important and crucial facts about these texts. Furthermore, Lucan in O returns a relatively high number, so someone could ask where is the “grey area where we should abstain from making any “yes” or “no” conclusions”? (Eder, 2018).To define this “grey area” a function offered by the GI algorithm was applied to find the optional parameters34; it only needs a table with frequencies (preferably the table that was used during the implementation of the GI algorithm) and the only limitation is that the authorial classes should be represented by more than one texts (otherwise they will be automatically excluded from the analysis) (Eder, 2018). Since it is computationally very intense it can take a lot of time to compute and the output is two numbers, the p1 and p2 parameters. The result after the optimization in our dataset with the aforementioned extracted features is:p1p20.150.73These two numbers can be further translated into binary (“yes” or “no”) answers, which means that for every value smaller than 0.15 and greater than 0.73 the answer can be transformed with a high degree of confidence into a “yes” or “no” respectively (Eder, 2018). In other words, this binary answer is that “if the result for an author is higher than the p2 value, then we can say with a degree of certainty that this is the author of the disputed text” or “if the result for an author is lower than the p1 value, then we can say, also with a degree of certainty, that they are not the authors of the disputed play; a number in between the p1 and p2 value indicates the “grey area” in which no safe conclusion can be made.Following this way of thinking Seneca’s results are higher than the p2 value, which means that we can say with certainty that he penned both of the disputed texts. However, at this point, we should go back to the definition of the GI method in order to fully grasp what we actually see and, at the same time, connect it with some of the close reading approaches that might shed light on these numbers.As mentioned before, the GI method tries to assess the similarity between two documents by using stochastically impaired feature spaces and by comparing these spaces to random selections of distractor authors. This definition can be further applied and translated into our research so that it can be eventually said that Seneca’s plays are more similar —almost identical someone could say— to the two disputed texts since both of them return results that are greater than 0.73, thus O and HO should be attributed to Seneca.Although we should remember that we have to deal with an imitator of Seneca’s style and writing (Herington, 1961; Ferri, 2014). From this perspective, it is quite normal to observe this amount of similarity with the rest of the Senecan plays and, thus, unavoidably for the algorithm to attribute these texts to Seneca the Younger. Furthermore, the imposters selected in this corpus are not possible candidates for Seneca’s disputed plays. As was stated before, the criteria behind this selection were the time of writing for each author and for Statius the similarity that Silvae has with O. This similarity can be observed to a greater extent in O than in HO (0.041 and 0.004). At this point, it is worth remembering again Ferri’s hypothesis. To remind this hypothesis again, Ferri (2014, p. 17-26) mentions two points that can connect temporally O with Statius’s Silvae: two cantica from O and a thematic and linguistic correspondence in Jupiter’s transformation scenes. To some extent, this hypothesis can be confirmed, because in comparison with O Statius's works bear a small resemblance, whereas with HO the similarity is almost non-existent since the number tends to be really close to 0.Moreover, it is interesting the fact that Lucan’s texts are similar to both O and HO. If we accept the hypothesis that an imitator wrote both of these works—or at least O— and that they were really influenced by the Senecan writing and style, then these results are making sense. In fact, Lucan was Seneca’s the Elder grandson which automatically makes him Seneca’s the Younger nephew. In addition to this fact, it has been pointed out that Lucan’s style patterns on that of Ovid and Seneca the Younger (von Albrecht, 2019, p. 936) and that Seneca’s style was “modelled in primis in the Ovidian mould” (Ferri, 2014, p. 31). In other words, since the imitator was copying Seneca’s style and way of writing and, by extension, Lucan was influenced by Seneca the Younger, then someone could expect this kind of similarity between the two disputed texts and Lucan. Last but not least, it should be mentioned that this kinship and influence of writing style from Seneca the Younger to Lucan led the algorithm of Brofos et al. (2014, p. 9) to a misclassification.By looking at the results of this method and by accepting the hypothesis that an imitator wrote the two disputed texts, it can be concluded that the General Imposters framework does not work properly when we have to deal with such a good imitator of Seneca’s the Younger writing style. It is really hard, even for the algorithm, to recognize the individual style of an imitator, especially when the latter uses verbatim some of Seneca’s words and phrases (Ferri, 2014; Tarrant, 2017). Since this observation has not been tested empirically it would be safer to avoid any general conclusion about it.Moreover, we can also observe a problem that was previously mentioned by Juola (2015). As it was mentioned extensively in the Description of the Dataset section we have an open-class problem with an ad hoc distractor corpus of authors, and thus an authorship verification problem (“did Seneca write the disputed plays?”) instead of a close-class authorship attribution case (“from the authors in a corpus, who is more likely to have written a disputed document?”). The creation of a corpus of authors, who are not possible candidates for a disputed document, but whose works can be compared with the disputed texts, because they are connected temporally, spatially, and linguistically, can minimize the risks, and obtain better results (Koppel et al., 2012; Juola, 2015, p. i106). Having these parameters in mind and looking at the results of the GI method, we can say that using this method in close-class verification problems can measure the influence a “distractor” has on the main author of a corpus. In addition, it clarifies the nature of this specific authorship verification problem for this specific author, which will be explained in the next sections.
4.4. Bootstrap Consensus TreeA visualisation has great explanatory power, especially when it comes to distant reading approaches. Different kinds of visualisation are suitable for different kinds of approaches, but all of them contribute each with each own power and allow scholars to draw conclusions or understand in a more human-like way what the numbers of the output mean. Even though visualisations are quite attractive and popular amongst scholars (Jockers, 2013), certainly there are some reliability issues with a few visual techniques. The scope of this thesis is not to discuss this kind of issue, but it does incorporate a lot of Eder’s (2017) ideas and approaches to address this problem in the upcoming graphs in order to yield more accurate results from the research question at stake.The great majority of traditional literary scholars might feel a little bit unfamiliar with the term “bootstrap consensus tree” since it is a visualisation technique that has been developed in the discipline of phylogenetics (Paradis et al., 2014 (as cited in Eder (2017, p. 55)). It has been introduced into computational stylometry by Eder (2013) and after that, it has been used in an increasing number of computational stylometric approaches to detect mostly the authorial fingerprint of translators (Rybicki, 2012; Rybicki and Heydel, 2013).Questions, such as “how does a bootstrap consensus tree work?” and “why is it more reliable than a simple dendrogram?”, might arise in the readers’ minds at this point. First things first, in order to grasp some new terms that are introduce in this section, they should be defined. Under the term “dendrogram” is any graphical drawing or diagram or plot that is used in numerical taxonomy, and it tries to describe a taxonomic system with a treelike depiction of the relationships; the type of the relationship does not matter, since they can be any kind of relationship that can be generated between individual taxonomic units (CaliŃski, 2014).Additionally, a Bootstrap consensus trees are unrooted phylogenetic trees (Baayen, 2008, p. 145) and their aim is double, amongst other things, is to solve the problem of cherry-picking in two ways (Eder, 2017, p. 55-6) and to visualize the information relevant to texts in a way that will be more transparent and meaningful to a broad audience. Firstly, in order to create a bootstrap consensus tree (henceforth: BCT) the R package stylo requires more than three iterations; this iteration can be done either at the level of MFWs or at the level of samples. In every one of these iterations, the model “takes” a snapshot. In each snapshot, some groupings might accidentally reappear, which means that some of the similarities between texts are due to chance. After that stage, the model tries to capture only the snapshots that contain the robust patterns. In other words, individual dendrograms, which are “one snapshot at a time” (Eder, 2017, p. 53), are being constantly evaluated in terms of robustness. Robustness at this point means, how many links-groupings between texts tend to reappear and, thus, we can say that these texts are more similar compared to other texts in the corpus. The last step in this procedure is the summarization of the information contained in the individual dendrograms, which is being transformed into clustering according to the most robust link (Eder, 2017, p. 56). To further explain it in other words, Baayen (2008, p. 146) is quoted:				“The basic idea of the bootstrap as applied to the present data is that we sample (with replacement) from the columns of our data matrix. For each sample, we construct the distance matrix and grow the corresponding unrooted tree with the node-joining algorithm. Finally, we compare our original dendrogram with the dendrograms for the bootstrap samples and calculate the proportions of bootstrapped dendrograms that support the groupings (subtrees, or clades in the terminology of phylogenetics) in the original trees. In this way, we obtain insight into the extent to which the clustering depends on the idiosyncrasies of the set of grammatical traits that happened to be selected for analysis.”The result after the aforementioned process will be a bootstrap tree which will depict a consensus between possibly different findings (the different findings can also be called dendrograms, snapshots or as it was mentioned before subtrees or clades) (Baayen, 2008, p. 146; Rybicki, 2012, p. 235). From what has been mentioned previously, it is obvious that BCTs through their established links do not represent stylometric distances between the documents. This kind of tree forms the nodes according to the most robust link; in other words, groupings between documents that tend to reappear and that they are not due to chance. To put it with Eder’s words “they indicate the strength of the consensus, or the repetitiveness across a number of virtual ‘snapshot’ dendrograms” (Eder, 2017, p. 56).The reliability of a BCT against dendrograms lies in the fact that the former, based on a range of Most Frequent Words (henceforth: MFWs) or MFCs (e.g., 100-1000 MFWs/MFCs)35, will capture the average behaviour of individual dendrograms or snapshots, whereas the latter constitutes only one snapshot of this corpus (Eder, 2017, p. 56). In addition to this, scholars might be tempted to choose for their research the one dendrogram that suits the most, considering their research question and the aim of their research. In contrast with the dendrograms, a BCT can eliminate this caveat. According to Eder (2017, p. 56), a BCT is possible to filter out local disturbances, which in any other case —by way of example, in a dendrogram— might be considered valid results.364.4.1. Feature selection for the BCTFor this kind of approach different features were required to be selected, since a BCT requires some extra parameters to be applied to the texts. Whenever that was possible, the same parameters as with the previous approach (see General Imposters method) were chosen, so that the results are comparable. The texts that were fed to the model were the same as in the General Imposters method; a tokenized text in which the pronouns has been removed.37  Furthermore, in order to avoid the cherry-picking of random parameters, every model was run with character 4-grams and character 5-grams several times within a range of 100 to 1500 MFCs with an increment of 100 and a culling of 0 to 100 with an increment of 20 in every iteration. Moreover, a consensus strength of 0.6 was applied to the data and the distance measure that was used was Eder’s Delta (see General Imposters method and Feature Selection). Before proceeding to the presentation and interpretation of the results, we should explain why some of these parameters were chosen and why the generated results, according to previous literature, can be considered reliable.The choice of character 4-grams and 5-grams in a range of 100 to 1500 MFCs follows Eder’s approach. In his study he shows that in Latin prose the accuracy of the model, in terms of correctly classified texts, reached 88.1% and 90.7% respectively using the 1500 MFCs (Eder, 2011, pp. 108-109). The reason why this is might happening has already been given in the Feature Selection section. Additionally, as it has been shown before Eder’s Delta seems to work better with Latin (Eder, 2015).At this point, two of the parameters that need further explanation is the consensus strength and the culling that was applied to the texts by the BCT. The consensus strength is a way for a BCT to choose which nodes will be considered and which nodes will be collapsed due to insufficient consensus. In other words, during the stage of visualisation of a BCT will only “consider nodes for which there exists a sufficiently large consensus among the individual cluster analyses (Eder et al., 2016, p. 114); among the individual dendrograms, we could say. For the BCT below, the consensus strength was set to 0.6, which means that a node should appear in, at least, 60% of the individual cluster analyses. This can be further translated that our visualization contains quite strong nodes since each one of them appears in at least 60% of the individual dendrograms that were analyzed.The culling allows users to specify to what extent a feature should be present in a corpus in order to be included in the analysis (Eder et al., 2016, p. 111). By way of example, if we set the culling level at 20, then only features that occur in at least 20% of the samples will be taken into account in the analysis; everything else will be ignored. Following this line of thought, if we set the culling level at 100, then only words that occur in every text or sample will be included in the analysis, whereas everything else will be removed. The only words that are highly possible to occur in every text are the function words or in our case (since we are looking for character n-grams) morphemes, prefixes or suffixes that are quite common throughout an oeuvre and might act as an invariant for the author’s fingerprint (Koppel et al. 2009, p. 11). We expect these morphemes to be used in a non-conscious way by the author (Kestemont, 2014, p. 61), thus their frequencies should remain relatively constant with respect to the topic without exception and it will allow to recognize texts by the same author on different topics (Koppel et al., 2009, p. 11); O is considered by a lot of scholars as fabula praetexta (Sluiter, 1949; Ferri, 2014).38 The R package stylo, through its Graphic User Interface allows its user to set an incrementation in the culling. In our experiment the range of the culling was set from 0 to 100 with an incrementation of 20 in each iteration.
4.4.2. ResultsThe results from the BCT were unexpectedly very surprising. In Figure 2 someone can observe four almost perfectly shaped clusters for each of the authors included in the dataset. Although, there are some nodes that need more attention.Figure 2: A Bootstrap Consensus Tree that contains the 33 texts of the dataset. The text “seneca octa5” corresponds to O, whereas the text “seneca hero3” corresponds to HO.To start with, only two of Persius’s texts form a cluster, whereas the other four tend to approach the center of the unrooted tree. A possible explanation for this, might be the size of the texts by Persius; they are much smaller than the rest of the texts.39 The length of Persius’s texts accounts for 2.9% of the total length of the texts in the corpus. Because of the insignificance in amount of data for this author, the model is unable to fully identify the authorial fingerprint, thus we have these arbitrary results with respect to Persius. A study of Eder and Rybicki (2013) has shown that the size of the training sample plays a significant role to the accuracy of the model used for classification. The same is happening with the two books of Achilleid and the fourth book of Silvae, A possible explanation for the two books of Achilleid might be the size of the texts which is relatively small, and it is due to the death of Statius before finishing it (only 167 lines were written for this epic poem) (Conte et al., 1999, p. 481). Also, since it is an unfinished epic poem, to some extent this clustering might be due to the fact that both of these works are drafts. Finally, the fourth book, according to Coleman (1998), happens to vary more in terms of meters than the rest of the books. Following this line of thought, we can say that the meter of this book might be a strong factor that defines which will be used, thus it might affect the clustering, because the more the meters vary the more the words vary as well, thus the more the frequencies of the features, that are used in a text, vary (Adams, 1997, pp. 9-10).Focusing on Seneca, we can see that O and Phoenissae40 move towards the center of the unrooted tree, whereas HO is clustered with the rest of the Senecan plays and especially with Medea, Thyestes, and Troades. In order to grasp why this is happening, we should remember at this point what Herington (1961), Carbone (1977), and Poe (1989) have claimed in their studies: O is the product of an imitator with limited literary experience, who tends to imitate the language and the style of Seneca the Younger by using words and phrases memorized by heart; thus, it seems very artificial. If we accept their theory, and by accepting their theory we accept the consensus of the majority of contemporary literary scholars today about O, it will make sense why O tends to behave like an outlier and tends to move towards the center of the BCT. It is a product of a very good imitator of Seneca’s style, thence it will be clustered with the Senecan plays since it is very similar to them, but it will move towards the center because there are some frequencies in the features that are note merely Senecan.Although, another interesting point in this visualization lies in the Phoenissae, it also tends to move towards the center even if it is considered to be a genuine Senecan play. A possible explanation for that might be, once again, the size of the text. It consists of 664 lines and 4075 words, which make it the shortest of the Senecan plays. Furthermore, it is considered to be a fragmentary and unfinished play with a lot of issues in terms of structure and unity (Frank, 1995). Moreover, as Frank (1995, p. 16) concludes, based on the innovations that exist in this play, it should be considered an experiment, which was abandoned by Seneca when he realized the technical difficulties. Having in mind this approach, it can explain why it behaves like an outlier within the whole corpus. Lastly, according to Fitch’s metrical analyses (as cited by Marshall (2014, p. 40)) in Phoenissae we have the highest percentage of sense-pause within a line (57.2%), and the highest percentage of shortened final -o; it is an outlier on its own. An interpretation of this observation by Fitch could be that the incidence of these metrical features leads to the choice of a completely different vocabulary.Something that needs to be mentioned in this visualization is the extent to which the BCT agrees with the dating of the Senecan plays made by Fitch (as cited by Marshall (2014)). Senecan plays can form three groups and since there is no concrete evidence about the dating, we can only approach the date with terminus ante quem and terminus post quem. The first group consists of Agamemnon, Phaedra, and Oedipus; terminus ante quem is 54 CE. The second group contains Troades, Medea, and Hercules Furens, that were composed around 54 CE. And the final group that consist of Thyestes, and Phoenissae, that probably were composed at any date around 62 CE.By looking at Seneca’s branch in Figure 2 we will see that with some exceptions it captures the order of dating made by Marshall (2014), which indicates that with the passage of time there is a different word frequency that, consequently, leads to different character frequency in Senecan plays.Moreover, Figure 3 depicts the Eder’s Delta distances between all of the texts in the corpus that were generated during the implementation of the BCT method. If we focus on the disputed Senecan texts, O and HO, we will observe that there are closer to Persius’ Satires than to any other play by Seneca.4.5. Principal Component AnalysisPrincipal Component Analysis (henceforth: PCA) is a technique that is used in authorship attribution studies in order to reduce dimensionality via feature extraction, and then the most important principal components are used for the interpretation of the texts in a two-dimensional space (Stamatatos, 2009, p. 545). In terms of dimensionality reduction and visualization of the results, PCA is a very efficient means, because through a PCA someone can easily detect dependencies and correlations within different vectors of data (Manousakis, 2020, p. 171). Juola (2008, p. 259) describes the method of PCA as follows: the first aim of a PCA is to rotate the underlying data space so that a new set of axes can emerge, which will be able to capture the most variance in the data. In the visualization of PCA we have some principal components. The first principal component is the one that captures the most variance in the data, whereas the second one is the axis orthogonal to the first that captures the next greater variance (Juola, 2006, p. 259), etc. If we have two dimensions in which there is a high correlation between the original data, then this correlation will be captured in one dimension which will be the vector sum of the original two (Juola, 2008, p. 259). In other words, this means that if we have two texts/variables that their feature vectors are positively correlated, and thus they are similar to each other, then these two texts will be plotted next to each other; if they are identical, they will be put on top of each other. To explain what correlation between two texts is, we should remember that PCA looks on the feature vectors that contain the relative values for individual features. Whenever the value for a feature in a text increase, the same does the value of a feature in another text, thus two texts will be plotted close to each other, since there exists a positive correlation between them, and so forth (Sartorius, 2020). In any other case the distance between two texts in a PCA graph might indicate dissimilarity of the vectors and, by extension, dissimilarity of the texts. Following this line of thought, in the context of authorship attribution/ verification studies the spatial closeness of individual data points in a PCA “can be the result of common genre, proximity in chronology, but is mainly the result of common authorship” (Burrows & Craig, 2001; Manousakis, 2020, p. 172). In contrast, the isolation of an individual data point inside the two-dimensional space that is defined by the PCA, can point to the opposite direction.So far, we have only seen approaches that compare Seneca’s disputed texts with other authors in a corpus. Although, if we take a closer look to the close reading approaches, we will observe that “traditional” scholars avoid comparing O and HO with other “candidate” authors, but they compare the texts with Seneca the Younger himself. PCA method will be applied only to the Senecan corpus, to observe that O even within the Senecan corpus behaves like an outlier.
4.5.1. ResultsThe features that were selected for this method were the same as before, except for the fact that a culling from 0% to 100% with an incrementation of 20 in every iteration was added. In the following graph we can observe that, even within the Senecan corpus, and looking at the 100- 1500 Most Frequent Characters, O still behaves like an outlier along with Phoenissae.41 The reason why Phoenissae is an outlier within the corpus of the authors and within the Senecan corpus has already been explained in the previous chapter.O is placed in the PCA graph far away from the genuine Senecan plays. As it was said before in the interpretation of such a graph, this can only mean that O is not similar to other plays of Seneca, since it is not even grouped with them. At this point, a “traditional” scholar might argue that it is very normal for O to be dissimilar to the other plays, since it is a completely different play and, in terms of genre, the only extant fabula praetexta.42 To answer to the aforementioned argument, it should be stressed that all of the texts in the Senecan corpus were cleaned by pronouns, which might be correlated with extratextual and intratextual information, such as genre, author’s gender, topic and narrative perspective (Newman et al., 2008, pp. 215-216; Hoover, 2014, p. 480; Kestemont et al., 2013).43 Sole aim of this preprocessing step was to make the experiment as less sensitive to this information as possible, and thus to target only to features that are highly connected to the authorial fingerprint (Kestemont, 2014, p. 60).When testing the texts against the top 100-200 MFCs of 4-grams and 5-grams, the results are becoming even more interesting. O, HO, and Phoenissae behave as outliers when compared to the rest of Seneca’s plays. Figure 5 shows that the plays that are considered genuine and attributed to Seneca the Younger, are all clustered together. Although, the two disputed texts and Phoenissae behave like outliers in comparison with the Senecan corpus of plays, especially when it comes to function words. Once again, at this point, it should be noted that for this experiment exactly the same parameters were used as in the previous experiments. Although, this time instead of looking at the 100- 1500 MFCs 5-grams and 4-grams, the range was set from 100 to 200. In Figure 6, even if we use the same rage of MFCs with tetra-grams (or even penta-grams), we will observe the three outliers of the PCA (see Figure 5) to be clustered closely together with each other, which can raise some concerns about the authorship of the texts—excluding Phoenissae.The line of thought behind this choice is that, as mentioned before, character n-grams can capture information below the word level (Kestemont, 2014, p. 62). Looking at the top list of these features, we look at very common suffixes, prefixes and case endings that are used by the author in a non-conscious way, thus their frequencies should not be increased or decreased pro rata to the topic (Kestemont, 2014, p. 61; Koppel et al., 2009, p. 11). Moreover, at this level of frequency and range, the use of these kind of words is almost impossible to be controlled by an author, thus this can explain why looking at the top 200 MFC n-grams in several iterations reveals the outliers that lie within the Senecan corpus and might be a strong indication why these texts, including Phoenissae,44 can be considered disputed. Lastly, the interesting to this visualisation is that both O, HO, and Phoenissae spatially are not placed on the same place. To an extent, this is expected, since according to “traditional” close reading approaches to Senecan plays, these texts were not written by the same author-imitator.
5. ConclusionsTo remind some of the arguments that support the idea that O and HO were not written originally by Seneca the Younger45, Ferri (2014) believes that O was attributed to Seneca the Younger by someone who lived later than Seneca, probably an antiquarian penchant who was admiring Seneca’s style and writing. This argument is also supported by the fact that in O, Seneca the Younger himself appears as an advisor of Nero, trying to deplore the vices of his times and warn his patron, although in vain ([Seneca], Octavia 377-437). Moreover, it has also been supported by literary scholars that the quality of the text and the language per se tends to deteriorate as we approach to the end of the play (Carbone, 1977); Poe, 1989). This feature is not something that is observed in the genuine Senecan plays, since Seneca the Younger was a really educated and experienced writer. On the other hand, there are also some concerns raised about the authorship of HO. More specifically, the length of the text and some passages that are reworks from other Senecan tragedies tend to reduce the quality of this play (Boyle, 2003; Tarrant, 2017).Having in mind these arguments and focusing on the results of each method individually, we will reach a conclusion based on the findings.Concerning the nature of Seneca’s authorship problem, the General Imposters method assumes a close-set verification problem. This can be generalized for all authorship attribution cases, because when we deal with imitators of the main author’s style of writing (in our case Seneca the Younger) and the possible candidate(s) is not included in the distractors’ corpus, then it is highly possible for the model to attribute the disputed text to the main author; especially when it reports such a high confidence for the prediction.46Looking at the top 100-1500 MFC 4-grams and 5-grams in a BCT (see Figure 2), we can observe that O and Phoenissae behave as outliers within the Senecan corpus, even though they are clustered with the genuine Senecan plays. A possible explanation for Phoenissae is that it is an unfinished poem by Seneca (in fact the shorter in length compared to the other plays, having only 4075 words). O is clustered to the side of the Senecan plays, but it moves closer to the centre of the unrooted tree, supporting the argument of close imitation of Seneca’s style.47Focusing on the Senecan plays per se and looking at the same range and count of MFC n-grams, O and Phoenissae once again they behave like outliers, whereas HO was placed between the rest of the genuine works. Even though when the MFCs were reduced to 100-200 (the count of the n-grams was preserved) both O and HO started to behave as outliers within the Senecan corpus. Phoenissae is placed not far from Thyestes, and it is aligned with this play (the latter is placed really closed to the other genuine plays).The change in behaviour of HO is explained because of its size. It is the biggest extant Latin drama, containing 11147 words, which is almost double the size of the rest of Senecan tragedies. Following the logic that the longer the text the longer the variation of the words in it, by looking at a relatively small number of MFCs (morphemes, prefixes, suffixes) the model can recognize the authorial fingerprint in a more efficient way.Based on the findings, it seems that two individual conclusions can be drawn, which are, though, connected to each other through close and distant reading approaches to Seneca. First of all, only within the Senecan corpus and using a relatively small number of MFCs n-grams, the disputed texts start to behave like outliers, whereas when they are compared to the texts of the other authors in the corpus, they are clustered within the Senecan corpus which only reinforces the argument for the existence of an imitator of Seneca᾽s style. Moreover, and based on the previous computational approaches concerning the Senecan texts, it can be argued that comparing the disputed plays with an arbitrary number of distractors and especially when there is no possible candidate author (as in the case of Seneca’s plays) cannot produce definitive results with regards to the authorship attribution of the texts. In conclusion, to the extent that someone can accept the findings of the methods used, it can be verified that the two disputed texts, O and HO within the Senecan corpus were not written by Seneca the Younger, but probably by some imitator(s), whereas Phoenissae —with regards to the argument about its authorship— raises some concerns that still needs to be examined.
6. Discussion and Further Research6.1. DiscussionThis analysis does not support the theory that O and HO were written by Seneca the Younger (Sluiter, 1949; Carlsson, 1926). Although, the findings support the hypothesis that O and HO were not written by Seneca the Younger but by an imitator (Herington, 1961; Carbone, 1977; Poe, 1989; Ferri, 2014).The results from the GI method indicate that this method is not very suitable for close-set verification problems using a relatively small dataset where the candidate author is not among the authors of the corpus. An explanation for this is that the model will more likely attribute the disputed text to the imitated author than to any other authors of the text. In addition to that, when a text has been written by an imitator the comparison of the disputed text with works of other (to some extent random) authors can generate precarious results with which only the influence (i.e., the degree of similarity) between texts can be measured.The degree of certainty for the verification of O as a non-Senecan play is higher than that of HO, since the former play behaves as an outlier within the Senecan corpus within a larger span of MFCs and in a greater variety of methods (see sections 5.4.2 and 5.5.1); the latter one requires the reduction of MFCs to 200 in order to start observing this result. This last aforementioned factor, even though it confirms the results of Nolden (2019), can be used as a limitation of the current research since HO behaved as an outlier only when a PCA was applied using the 200 MFCs 5-grams and 4-grams. In my opinion, with regards to HO it would be safer to conclude that there are features of the text that do not fit within the rest of the genuine Senecan plays (for instance, the length) and that in order to accept the visualisation of the BCT in Figure 6, prior to this it is a prerequisite to have already accepted that O is a non-Senecan play. On the other hand, with respect to O someone can argue that the unique genre of the play is a factor that is responsible for these results, but it should be noted that during the pre-processing phase, the texts used for the research were cleaned from words that are related to the genre or topic. Moreover, O behaves as an outlier, within the Senecan corpus, in both of the ranges, 1500 MFCs and 200 MFCs 4-grams and 5-grams. The fact that it is clustered with the rest of the Senecan texts can only be used as an indication that an imitator wrote, at least, O.Another outlier within the Senecan corpus was also Phoenissae. The fact that this work is an unfinished Seneca’s poem along with the, comparatively with the other plays small, size of the text, might provide an explanation of the reason of its inclusion to the outliers. This result confirms the observations made by Nolden (2019). Moreover, if we accept the argument made by Frank (1995, p. 16) that Phoenissae is an unfinished work by [Seneca?] in which he tried to unite two different tragic themes, then this might explain why it tends to become an outlier within the Senecan corpus.Last but not least, it should be noted that the findings of this thesis confirm the observations made by Eder and Rybicki (2013), when they noticed that the size of the samples affect the attribution process. This effect can be observed to the small texts of the corpus used for this research, since each one of them (and especially Persius) forms a rather peculiar cluster in comparison with the rest of the texts in the corpus.In conclusion, we could say that as long as O is clustered with the Senecan corpus of plays but performs as an outlier within these texts it should be considered a pseudo-Seneca play. In other words, a play that was written by an imitator and not by Seneca himself. In addition to that, Phoenissae also behaves as an outlier within the Senecan corpus, thus the aforementioned peculiarities suggest that this happens because of the problems and innovations that Seneca the Younger tried to introduce to this play and the fact that some scholars support the idea that this text is not written by Seneca the Younger; also, because it is an unfinished and thus, to some extent, unedited poem. Although, it is something that needs to be further examined. Lastly, it is really hard to conclude something that is not precarious about HO since, based on the findings, only in a PCA using the 100-200 MFCs behaved as an outlier.6.2. Further ResearchThere are still a lot that need to be done in order to decrypt the authorial fingerprint behind the Senecan disputed plays. First of all, an investigation on the reason why HO behaves as an outlier when the 100-200 MFCs are used and not in every other case. Furthermore, it may yield interesting results if we delve into the two disputed texts and compare them with the rest of the plays in the Senecan corpus in terms of lexical richness. Of course, this approach suggests that we accept the hypothesis that O and HO were written by an imitator and not by Seneca himself, thus our aim is not to prove whether they were written by Senecan or not (as lexical richness methods are being traditionally used) but to measure the quality of the imitation and learn more about the imitator(s) themselves. Since it has not yet been tested, it would be nice to examine and empirically test the case of an imitator and the GI method; whether it can “fool” this method or not. Last but not least, the fact that Phoenissae acts as an outlier in almost every method used in this thesis along with the arguments that were made by literary scholars about its authorship and bizarreness of its structure, raises some concerns that require further investigation.